[Applause]
our next speaker is uh
professor at perfect
there's something old and something new
in this program of the
lao state committee coming five years
after the
vietnam day chapter cornwall is
something new because
he represents kind of contact with
what's going on in the world
that we didn't have five years ago he's
been there he's been with the tahiti now
in their promise of he has been
bombed in that period by american
colleagues as well as today
i represent the old unfortunately i'm
doing the same sort of thing i was doing
five years ago
and i'm beginning to feel a little bit
uh
wonderful sometimes about my own notice
but uh
they asked me to come and do it so
inside being invited i'm going to give
you what as i
realized is an academic lecture
somebody's even put
a map up here and not only is it an
academic
lecture but it's in a sense about an
academic subject
because uh the realities of laos
are what he was talking about which is
the only
worldly based popular movement in laos
just as the nlf is
as our papers have admitted now for some
years
the only broadly based popular movement
in south vietnam that is the reality
of laos and i'm going to talk about
matters which
from one point of view are perhaps a
little technical a little legalistic a
little
academic i want to talk about uh
matters like what the americans are
doing with
the government in gentian that he has
just described
so eloquently in which if you like
symbolizes the unrealities
in laos but there's a purpose for this
because
uh the story allows it's hard to believe
but it's even more of a scandal
than the story what the americans have
done in laos it's even more of a scandal
than the story of what the americans
have done in vietnam
the big difference between the two
countries from this point of view is
that laos is even further away from the
tv cameras and that what
uh the sense that the showcase
for what america can do in asia was
vietnam and they had to put up certain
pretenses certain appearances we haven't
had those appearances we haven't had
those potential jobs
let's take two matters uh there's a fig
for america the american presence in
south vietnam which is
we have a few friends there not very
many it's a
it's a from most accounts a rather
reactionary
landowning class backed now by uh
growing bureaucracy we're dependent on
the american president but there are
some people who want us in south vietnam
and we have been working with those
people
against the rest against the great
majority of the people
of south vietnam in laos america
has treated the ruling elite at times
just as cynically just as brutally
as it has been treating the laotian
people
and another thing which obscures for
some people
the real issues in south vietnam is the
fact that it doesn't look as if america
started it in south vietnam because
after all there was a struggle going on
before
and the americans came in at a certain
stage and then you've got a lot of
legalistic argument about
uh you know what happened first and so
on but there's very little ambiguity
about this in the case of laos because
this recent history of laos is a story
which has
obviously you can take it a long way
back and really we should go back to the
days of the french and perhaps even in
the 19th century
but in recent times there is a happy
beginning
to this story before the americans come
in and that is uh
this is a story which i think you should
know not because it's going to change
your minds particularly but
because i think it's a story you should
tell the other people and you'll be able
to read about it
next month's ramparts mint carrot has an
article coming out and
i've written myself the new york review
and although it's in a sense academic
it probably has a certain shock value
um in 1957 november of 1957
it's the happy beginning i want to take
up when suvanna puma
who was then the neutralist premier of
laos reached an agreement with his half
brother suparnubong who was the head of
the pabet lao was then still is the head
of a padlet lao
for the political integration of the
palette lao into the political life of
mouse
and it was agreed that their battalions
would be absorbed into the lao
army that they would be given two seats
in the
um in the cabinet which would make it a
truly neutralized coalition
and that elections would be held so that
we could
if if they had any kind of popular
following they could then have seats in
the ocean assembly
and uh that wasn't sort of the sheer
campaign stage of the
compatible they came into this in good
faith
and the elections were held in the
spring of 1958 and the
results of the elections were really bad
news for the patent dow because
essentially they won the election
there were it was a special kind of
election for new seats that had been
opened up
21 of them uh they were but they were
all over laos
and the planet vowel won 13 of those 21
seats
supanovang won more votes than any other
candidate
and this of course represented a crisis
in washington
back to the end the american ambassador
to laos had just
gone before a congressional committee
about a month before the election said
we have a wonderful aid program going
over there
it's very popular and i am confident as
a result
of all the standard things we've done
with usaid that the party
will be decide resoundingly defeated in
the forthcoming election
and then they won 13 out of 21 seats
and in fact one of the main issues they
used in the election
was the scandals and the corruption and
the
and the class interests that surrounded
the american aid program in ralph's way
back then 57-58
so uh what was the reaction of the
united states
it was decided that we couldn't go along
with this sort of thing it was necessary
to overthrow this coalition government
because it had two-handed found members
in it
that's what the americans proceeded to
do the
cia went in and organized a new
political
movement relying heavily on the generals
of the army and particularly
a man whom swedenborg says they flew in
from paris where he was finishing an
army course in in paris
puminosa the cia plum bag
the state department withheld withheld
aid to
savannah puma um allegedly
bribes were passed in the assembly and
the first thing you knew you had a price
at parliamentary crisis a vote of no
confidence and subana puma had been
thrown out as a result of american
intervention
there was no north japanese intervention
at this time nobody claimed there was
any northern vietnamese intervention at
this time
well uh what happened then you've got a
right-wing government and it held its
own election
and american sources described that cia
agents went around the country bribing
and they they did it publicly you could
see them handing out the money
and this the results of this election
were astonishingly different from the
results of the election
a year before nobody loved uh
candidates elected in fact in this
province of san never which was their
problems i believe they got something
like six votes
that was the way the election was run
and washington thought everything was
fine
and they um proceeded to uh the new
government
proceeded to pursue they've had it lao
militarily as well uh it ordered
the valve italians said you agreed back
in november 57 remember you were going
to join our army
but of course from the panama point of
view the the deal hadn't been lived up
to on the other side
one of the battalions in 1959 refused
to be uh integrated into
this lao army which was now under a much
more right-wing government
and that is the beginning of the
fighting not only in laos
but also in indochina in southeast asia
the war that we are fighting now
in south vietnam and in north vietnam
and in cambodia and laos
became a hot war at that moment and it's
it's it's an important moment for many
reasons one interesting thing
is that that year 1959
which saw the resumption of a hot war in
southeast asia not very hot at that
stage but but of the war
instead of us investment dropping off in
southeast asia
marvelous thing happened u.s investments
was stepped up
in southeast asia as the americans began
to take more and more of
a direct hand in backing up
uh the army's first of laos later of
south vietnam
as the situation deteriorated you might
think for what you've never learned
about uh behavior in investment capital
well that would mean that the
capital would stay away but that is in
fact the period
in which capital started to flow into
the area
so we have now uh an investment picture
where something like 40 percent of the
investments
in the foreign in the far east american
investments are in petroleum
and are paying off at a rate which comes
out to an average according to business
week in december of this last year
of 34 a year which means that any man
who goes in there and puts in his 10
million dollars will have his investment
back
in three years so it's a very silly
question indeed to ask if anyone is
profiting from
this war in southeast asia they
certainly are
to go back to 1959
uh they had a phony election
in the spring of 1959 encouraged by the
cra
and in uh in the summer of 1959 a
congressional
inquiry back in washington published a
report which revealed
on the one hand the enormous scandals
involved
in the u.s aid program in house and
scandals involving not only laotians but
also americans
and it also put out what was for
congress i think a really quite incisive
critique of the whole
idea of everything that was being done
there and pointed out
that what we were what the americans
were doing was in a sense
promoting social instability rather
than order in progress
well more than one historian has
suggested it was in response to this
congressional inquiry and the very real
risk that the flood of usa
to the army the the the chance this
might be cut off
led to the phony invasion of the fall of
1959 and a lot of the talk about
these terrible north vietnamese in laos
goes back
to this phony invasion which uh was
staged in late august early september of
1959. there was a certain amount of
shelling going on
after all the the royal
which for years have been occupied by
the patent law of italians
sent out little guard posts everywhere
and what happened on august 30th
1959 was that two
of these posts were shown two posts
three of them were evacuated but one of
them uh was not showing
the the the people in there just holding
it up
but what happens when three posts
are evacuated in san neiger province
where the u.s
tv cameras never get well one thing that
happened was
four days later in the washington post
there was a story saying that 80
villages had been overrun
about 380 villages have been overrun by
an invading force
of up to 3 500 men and these fantastic
kind of figures which
we're still getting now in nixon's
statement in uh of march
6. now the figure is now 67
but it has a history it has a history
it's absurd
as as ridiculous as this and if anyone
you know just can't
get their mind fit around the scandal of
this order
they should read what bernard paul wrote
consistently
about what happened in august 1959 and
bernie paul was there
and verner paul in those days was a
pretty reliable
critic of u.s policy because he was in
fact in
very much in touch with the u.s army and
helping out and advising
uh uh special forces and that sort of
thing but
that he said categorically well
his chapter on this subject i think uses
the words of the laos fraud
or something like that and he's not the
only man to talk in this way
well uh i'm sorry i i think a little
while back i said there was an election
in 1959 that election was in 1960
um and it was only in 1960 that you had
a pure right-wing kumi nosovan type
government and uh a student of
dialectics
might predict what would happen result
and they had a government that was put
in and based only on a fraudulent
election and nothing else
uh you had a reaction against it and it
didn't come from the patent lao
it came from the middle class
essentially
anti-communist officers of the laotian
army who could see the corruption
who knew the election was a phony and uh
who therefore
uh reacted against it and this was the
crew of cong wave back in
uh the summer of 19 uh in august 1960
and uh what happened was that savannah
puma came back
and he had the support of a
strong element in the army which the
united states had actually been
assisting all these years
so america was faced with a new kind of
crisis and there were some elements in
the state department who said well we
better recognize development is all
there is
and the assembly even though it was
being elected in this completely phony
election
they recognized suhama puma so that
eventually the united states
also recognized subhanallah for a second
time
uh in late 1960 but there was a there
was a trick to it because at the same
time
that the united states recognized
savannah puma
they also sent out a team to
laos i'm shortening the story someone
it's a
really long story even so they said
they sent out a top-level delegation
which included the ambassador who had
helped
dump savannah puma the first time it
also included
john nichol irwin from the uh
from the pentagon from the the
department of defense
division of international security
affairs who incidentally is married to
a watson heiress of the ibm fortune and
whose father-in-law
had been uh whose father-in-law had been
a director of the
uh what do they call the far east
american council of commerce
and industry back to the 50s and his
brother-in-law
was a director of the same party's
american council of commerce and
industry in the 1960s
and when parsons and john nichol irwin
came out to laos it was bad news for
laos
and what john nichol irwin specifically
did was he went down
to pumi no savannah's army which
did not yet recognize the value puma and
which was refusing to
and according to the saturday evening
post and other
the kind of sources i try to rely on for
this story
john nichol irwin told told boomi no
savannah to go ahead
and capture the city of pyeongchang with
his royal lao army supported by
u.s assistance from the government which
we officially recognize
see this is all just a little bit
infighting but
among the middle class or reactionary
elements in laos
and yet that is the kind of uh straw and
clay out of which
these geniuses in the u.s embassy in
laos have been trying to build a new
society leaning towards the free world
in the way that jacqueline
talked about and air america
flew arms and supplies for three months
to pumina nosoda down in the south
of uh laos uh waiting for him to go out
and capture
the city of the intel it took a great
deal of encouragement booming also
army was not known as a great fighting
army
most people say it also took the
intervention of some thai forces
at the crucial moment and some people
say that it took the intervention of
some woman down
nationalist chinese forces who have been
hanging out
in laos and in burma and in thailand for
years
supported by the cia and by
the asian version of air america which
is a civil air transport which is a
nominally a chinese
uh airline based in formosa but is in
fact
an airline which is 40 owned by the
company
in america which owns also air america
now the
last day committee asked me to digress
at this point for a moment
because uh the uh
two or three of the top managerial
personnel
in uh air america are people who were
recruited
from an amp and more than that
back in the uh if you can follow me
through all this the uh
the phony invasion crisis of uh the fall
of 1959
one of the american responses to that
have been
there were suddenly some volunteers in
arizona who call themselves the american
uh american flyers for laos is what they
call themselves
and uh out of their sort of zeal for
freedom
um
they announced they were forming a a
group which would
help outlast uh by flying for laos
and they came into laos in uh august
september of 1959 about the same time as
air america itself
seems to have come into uh laos now the
man who organizes american fliers per
vows
is cave was a an american air force
reserve pilot
working as a civilian in a place called
portugal in
arizona which is a place where pan am
had a
big contract for uh developing
secret i believe some kind of
electronics with something i don't
understand it's a very secret contract
um and there are many other reasons
it said for example that air america
gets a lot of its planes used from pan
am um for thinking that panama is
organizationally involved with
air america it's very clear that pan am
got the bulk of the military airlift
contracts
into southeast asia at that time pam was
the only american airline flying into
bangkok which is the way you get to to
laos
it's very clear that i am about the bulk
of those contracts and in fact those
contracts came at a time when pan
am was having a crisis of its own and
just a few
months earlier it told another
congressional committee that if they
didn't get some kind of help
from the federal government by which
they really meant
military airlift contracts they would be
uh
forced to go out of the international
flying business altogether
within six months which was a kind of
ultimatum well they got the help
from the federal government in the form
of the military airlift contract
uh into southeast asia and i just like
to quote you a couple of statistics from
a very good article on pan
am which has come out in the issue
number two of standalones the the
revived warren henkel magazine uh from
these
said you can think what you like about
scandinavians but you've got to admit
this is a good article for pan
am last in the last year we had
statistics for
1968 uh and for
flying military uh
price between america and and asia in
that year
anam was paid 99.8 million almost 100
million
dollars in 1968 the last year for which
complete figures
are available in that same year panama's
pacific operation generated more than a
half
of pan am's operating profit
and again if we go back now to
um back to 1959-6061
which is when we went into laos and it
stands into southeast asia
and that year pan am was awarded 70
percent of the
mill all military charter contracts
um and so that in 1961
when twa which did not get so many
contracts while
38 million dollars thanks to the pacific
revenues of pan
am it showed a problem 6.3
for the first time in about three years
it's been a very bad time for the
airlines up
for the year 57 through 59 and pan am
was saved from this crisis due
visibly above all to the new source of
revenue from military contracts
flying into into southeast asia
well um i talked a certain amount of the
these historical points as you can see
it doesn't really
latch onto the significant social
movements in laos
but it does tell us i think it shows us
in a very native way
uh the what america was willing to do in
that country
we were not helping the elite of laos
and what we did in that period
we were willing to dump savannah pumas
as readily as we were willing to bomb
the patent law
and that is one of the the ways in which
what we did there goes beyond uh what we
were doing in south vietnam
that period though later of course it
turned out that we were also quite
willing
to dump no indian um 1962
the tides the ties are an element in
this you mustn't be racist and only
blame
america uh some of america's allies in
the east share the blame and
particularly
thailand it's always had a special
interest in
laos uh lao is from their point of view
a dialect of thai
and there are far more people who speak
lao who live in thailand
seven to nine maybe twelve million
dollars then there are
two or three million who live in laos
and
one of the results of the kind of aid
program which was
administered by the united states in the
50s was to increase
the dependence of laos on the thai
economy
and it was thailand over and over which
insisted that
there was which was most shrill about
the menace of communism
in laos and asked america to help
well in march of 1962 uh
tonight coleman the thai foreign
minister came to washington
and signed a document which has proven
very important in the history of the war
though it wasn't much noticed at the
time the
so-called tanat russ memorandum of march
which said that in the event of an
emergency america would be
prepared to supply unilateral aid to
thailand
under the cover of the sierra treaty
well it was
well timed because only two months later
uh general kuni nozoban's army announced
that he was being attacked by chinese
communists
it pulled out of a small community into
which it had gone
right up 50 miles from the chinese
border against the advice of its
american advisors
and in the wake of this flight from this
post where they shouldn't have been in
the first place
um the uh
the thais said we're being attacked you
know there's
a communist flood is engulfing us so
president kennedy put 5 000 troops into
thailand
and that was the time when the north
vietnamese i think began to take a
serious
interest military interest in what was
going on with us
it was according to uh books like uh
there's a book put out under the aegis
of the council of foreign relations in
new york a man called donald
d-o-m-m-e-n called conflict in laos came
out in 1964
and uh he's essentially anti-north
vietnamese in fact
he was suggesting that america should
send in special forces
uh they said the uh special forces went
in and arranged for the noiseless
liquidation
of the north vietnamese battalion he
said this would have considerable shot
effect
in hanoi so that's the general sort of
line of the book
and yet even he says that it was
only in the summer of 1962 in response
to these 5 000
u.s troops in china that north
vietnamese key thousand border patrol
the tower
decoded border patrol moved from north
vietnam
over the frontier passes into laos
and took up defensive positions along
the laotian side of the board because
obviously it's easier to defend
a a mountain pass uh from the top than
it is from the bottom inside your own
country so
that is another source um nixon now
talks in his march 16
about 6 000 north vietnamese troops in
laos in 1962. i done it was anything
like that
many but i am quite confident that the
major proportion
of those troops where these people will
come in defensively
in response to this major u.s escalation
in
thailand you really can never understand
anything it's happening in laos unless
you think also
about thailand well 1964 i'm going to
try and make this
okay uh it was important
it was important in america it was the
first year of johnson's administration
it was important in
vietnam it was the first year after it's
him and the year began with a right-wing
coup against the threat of neutralism
which put in general
and we saw a rapid increase in american
support through
1964. same thing happened in laos there
was a coup in laos in april
1964 and it's an interesting clue it
happened on april 19th
and uh just a day before
the three factions in laos the
neutralist the patented lao
and the right-wing faction of kuminosuba
and their three leaders
himself had met in order to try
and restore the 1962 coalition which had
broken down
and uh dennis warner who is another
pro-western reporter
says that uh one of the reasons
that the excuse is given to mobilize
people for a coup
against fumi no savannah and against
ivana puma was
that they were agreeing to the
neutralization of the capital so that
the
neutral coalition government could be
restored in in the capital so in other
words this
looks to me another coup against
neutralism just like the january coup
of 64 in south vietnam and it is one
month after that coup
that the united states starts the hot
war of bombing
of southeast asia
air force and navy really wanted to do
obviously it's clear from what they were
saying
how they wanted to bomb north vietnam
but they weren't being allowed to bomb
north vietnam and there was a great deal
of tension
in washington at that time between the
jesus staff
or some of them who wanted to go
to a u.s air war and the president and
his political advisors who said look
this is an election year
come back in a few months and what seems
to have happened
was that although the president in the
first half of 64
held the line on the bombing of north
vietnam
he gave a qualified permission
to the bombing of laos he said you can
fly
armed fighters over there if anyone
should statue uh then you can
fire back in uh in retaliation and
apparently
a lot of the pilots who are flying those
so-called reconnaissance flights
uh complained about their orders which
said that they had to fly
very low altitudes and fly very slow and
they said to their superiors but we have
got very good uh cameras uh
in these planes so we can fly much
higher much faster and get just as good
pictures but the orders were quite clear
they were to fly low
they were to fly slow and sure enough
one of them got shot down
and uh that is the beginning not to talk
about incidents which came
three months later but many 1964 and
june 1964
the beginning of the u.s air war
in southeast asia not advising anybody
doing it ourselves and using jets in
june 1964.
in aviation week which is a very
well-informed trade journal
said on june 22nd 1964 and who can look
it up
they said that president johnson seems
to be awaiting
the public reaction to this what they
call it but it was the first u.s
offensive military action since korea
they said that
president johnson seems to be awaiting
public reaction to this before taking
the next
big step on the escalation scale
so this was all happening where we
couldn't see it and most of us didn't
know it was happening but it was
happening and it was
it was as bad then as what jacques
was talking about and i i made one big
mistake in this article which
has just come out in the new york
reputable books because i didn't realize
just how serious just how total was the
kind of bombing that went on
in laos that we didn't know about way
back in the second half of 1964
but there are statistics which say that
already by
the middle of 1965 we had generated
something like 150 to 160
000 refugees in laos and if i can just
make these figures come home to you when
we talk about
seven 600 thousand refugees in laos
nobody nobody knows for sure how many
people there are in laos
because there hasn't been a census there
but it's something like two and a half
three million people
maybe four million people so we're
dealing in the order here or maybe
maybe a quarter or a third of the whole
population
you know if you can remember what uh
what people like scallopino and
woldowski were always saying in 1964
they said try multiplying the
terrorist statistics in south vietnam in
an american scale
and to get some picture of what it means
well this is a third of the population
of laos possibly living
in refugee camps or maybe in chicago
concentration camps resettlement camps
whatever you like
uh around the in the valley around
pyeongchang that is the kind of
operation that went on
and it was only after that kind of
bombing started
it was only after that kind of bombing
started that for the first time we get
substantive reports of north vietnamese
combat battalions
after what could the planet now do
originally they were in a political
struggle
and they had been forced in 1959 into a
military opposition for which they were
not very well prepared
and then in 64 they are now connected
largely to
u.s incompetence much stronger than they
were before and
they are they are fighting a
at times at least a kind of military
insurrection
and the united states starts this total
bombing policy
well as jacques cornwall has described
you the results
and maybe these results were intended i
don't know that maybe they knew from the
very beginning that they wanted to
separate the fish from the ocean
way back in 1964 and to get rid of the
population in that area
so that the uh the gorilla units would
not be able to survive
so it's certainly not to surprise me
that there are now
reports of north vietnamese combat
battalions up there
in in some neighborhood problems but
then as much as nixon was always saying
we're just trying to
save american lives down in south
vietnam let me let me drive on this
point that uh
deformed was made up here
and there are two things about san diego
province
on the one hand it is the capital of the
patent lao
resistance but it is also the area where
the cia
has been harming so advising supplying
male guerrilla tribesmen since 1960
since uh we told kuminosupon to move
against susana puma
and not only have we been arming them to
move against the pilot law in that area
but jack fuzzy has reported the la times
that they've also been used
to move into north carolina and finally
mr cornwall told us
there was more than one patty and nakano
at least two
forward communication spaces which were
used for the all-weather bombing of
north vietnam
so really nixon who knows all this has
considerable foots power when he comes
up with a march 6 statement
which says that north vietnam has
nothing to fear
as long as it stays within its own
borders i mean there's been six years of
this
ten years of the cia operations with the
mayo
tribesmen and he knows it and so finally
i i'm going to stop and then we'll also
ask questions that's fine
but you know what reminds me about this
march 6th statement of his or house and
the reason that i've sort of
argued with some of the points that it's
raised is that
this statement looks to me suspiciously
like a white paper
which came out on south vietnam back in
early 1965.
that was a point when uh the
johnson had finally decided in early 65
yes he was going to
go ahead and bomb north vietnam and
and many other things as well we look
back to americanize the war
um and the first thing they did was
escalate the infiltration estimates
they more they almost doubled the their
estimates of the number of north
vietnamese allegedly coming down into
uh south vietnam and they talked about
and they named in fact
entire north vietnamese battalions they
named them by number they said they're
now operating in
in south vietnam six months later
mcnamara
uh in a press conference talked about
he had found a real north vietnamese
battalion operating six months later and
he made it quite clear this is the first
one they'd run across
but six months later everything had
changed because by then we had a regular
air war in southeast asia
and we also had a regular american
ground war on the ground so that this
little sort of academic point that in
fact there hadn't been a north
vietnamese
uh that valued back when we started the
bombing really was academic at that
stage
well this march 6 statement of president
nixon's spikes made it
similar in this respect the uh for some
time now the department of defense has
been
cruising along on this really incredible
figure 50
000 north vietnamese troops they must
think that
the enemies can do everything you know
they're threatening thailand they're
about to take over cambodia uh they've
uh you know justify this kind of
american operation in south vietnam for
years
at a rate of 3 000 a week
so that they for a long time they had
this figure of 50 000 and suddenly it's
000. that is to me
uh a familiar phenomenon it's what
happened in the
early you see this is the dry season
coming up when you start you make your
big push in three months particularly in
laos because by about the end of may or
early june
the reign of the monsoon comes in and
everybody just digs in and stays where
they are for
another six months and uh it's
very alarming to me to see once again
just as we've seen in south vietnam an
escalation
of the infiltration statistics
because what he has come out with in
this march 6 statement on laos is not
just a false picture of an
american response to north vietnamese
subversion and
invasion of laos which is what he calls
it but it's an argument for escalation
and um i when i wrote a reply for it for
the new york review i didn't know what
the escalation was going to be but i
said
it it looks bad and then of course about
three days three days later we had this
coup in cambodia
who headed by a general long knoll who
has been known for years
uh to be very pro-american to be anxious
for sia nuke's job to have been in touch
with americans
and i don't know uh i i can't say that
the americans said okay london
you know today's the day but even cbs
pointed out
it was very curious that on the day of
the coup
u s army units were moved up to the
cambodian border into very extreme
forward positions
so it looks like they may have a real
indochina war
again and the i think it's terribly
important in terms of the
current political talk of vietnamization
in this country
which nixon has been asking us to look
at the war where the tv camera
used to be in the past they're not
usually there so much nowadays
but uh to think about the ground war
in south vietnam and say look we're
vietnamizing it
uh we have to be very conscious of the
kind of bombing
the kind of air war which has been going
on behind the scenes so to speak up in
laos
and which i think is intended for the
whole of indochina so that cambodian
sanctuaries
uh will sooner or later prove
incompatible with this kind of air war
strategy
and uh as i say it's very important to
remain
fully conscious of uh what the americans
have been doing in this very distant
country because it isn't just a vietnam
war
it's obviously a war not just for into
china but really
um authorities and
particularly uh whether those areas will
find
their own allies their own neighbors
their own trading partners
or whether uh there would be a patented
voice on them
by our country thank you very much
um maybe maybe while we're collecting
the money we can take
a few questions
good press by mansfield and
cbs and so on but i wonder
the sort of rather black white
uh cynical estimate that uh to cornwall
made for the chances of neutralism and
laos i wonder if the same sort of thing
isn't happening
perhaps not quite too so clear in
cambodia as well
that for some years now to see the
cambodian economy has not been
prospering
there was a lot of health but a lot of
us was put on education a lot of people
educated the coming out of the schools
and there are no jobs for them
and in fact tells me that many of them
and when you've seen on tv all these
college people cheering and lining up to
join the army
it isn't because their hearts are full
of love of their country and they
they just can't wait to fight the north
vietnamese it's because
uh nominal is going to open up the army
and this is some kind of short-term
solution to the economic crisis in
in cambodia and particularly a way of
dealing with all of these unemployed
supposed elites so that there is a kind
of
slowly decaying situation and has been
for some time in cambodia not as acute
as in indonesia under sicarno
mostly because cambodia is uh it
produces a great deal of food it has a
relatively small population
so most people get along but there is a
kind of
stagnation which has produced among the
more educated elements
in in recent uh years uh a tendency to
polarize and see you know its own
party which is supposed to be the one
part of the room cambodia
has been polarizing about left-wing and
right-wing elements
and uh cno has been very aware of this
um
he uh he promoted long-null the minister
of defense to be prime minister because
i thought it was safer
there were rumors of a coup way back in
november 1966
um and siena did then what he did this
time
i think he split he got out of the
country
and i think it was rather clever
appearing to do that because he rode out
of the store and waited to see what
happened and if there had been a coup
then i suppose he would have done what
he he did do this time when he was a
cool that's
they go to china and uh try to come back
there is a uh i think a certain amount
of genuine
peasant support for super borisiano
because he did the sort of thing that
you can see castro doing in saul mango's
movie he went around in the country
and he would get out of his car and pick
up a shuttle and you know
put a couple of rocks on the highway and
so on so he has a certain amount of
popular following
but it doesn't represent i think an
organized structural base for
some kind of third uh neutral neutralist
force in cambodia it's just simply the
personal popularity of sienna there was
a great deal of corruption
around him perhaps not involving him
personally but certainly involving his
family
and uh so it's just too depressing they
like
uh the stories happen in other areas i
think it if there is so little hope
for neutralist uh tendencies in these
countries is precisely because the
united states
has put such an emphasis on uh military
aid and so on these countries and it's
in all of these countries the domino
theory really works
whereas if you move just a little bit
further
west for example to a country like burma
which
made made a very wise decision years ago
way back in the early 50s just not to
have anything to do
with american aid in a country like that
even though it is on the chinese border
they neutralism seems to be possible but
in the countries where america has been
messing around
for two decades i'm not sure that it is
yes
this is the base and then which fell on
march the 11th and the announcement was
made on march 30th
um now i i personally i mean everyone
has his own theory
my my personal theory is that johnson
made
all those announcements because the
dollar was threatened as it had never
been
threatened before in the history of the
dollar there's a british book out that
says in the month of march 1968
european banks were refusing to catch
american federalist checks
and i mean that's that's like you know
that's like going into church and seeing
that the mother of god isn't over the
altar or something
it was a mode of truth for the american
government take some more questions
at the end